---
sidebar_position: 3
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';
import HisyeoTabs from '@site/src/components/HisyeoTabs'
import HisyeoText from '@site/src/components/HisyeoText'
import HisyeoWord from '@site/src/components/HisyeoWord'
import HisyeoTooltip from '@site/src/components/HisyeoTooltip'

# The Great Weave

Through a carefully orchestrated combination of the gods' powers, **The Great
Weave** was built. It is a garden of gigantic "trees" where each branch is a
sapient being's life story which is added when they traverse to the other side
and each root of the trees or thread of the mycelia is a soul encoded by Dimîtu
as so-called Threads into the Great Weave.

## Transition

When the body’s work is done, when Îfêstôs’s strong materials grow tired and the
vibrant song of Kulîôbî fades from the flesh, the journey does not end. It
simply *changes*. This is not a moment for fear, for there is no judgment, no
final test to pass. There is only the gentle, steady presence of Bostet.

Bostet, who greets us at birth, is there to accompany us at our departure. They
are the midwife of our final breath. Their warmth surrounds the spirit, ensuring
the crossing is not a violent tear, but a soft unfurling, a release. The unique,
unrepeatable spark of your self—the precious, one-of-a-kind identity so valued
by Xôcibîlî—is carefully cupped in their hands and guided away from the silent
vessel of the body.

But you are not cast into a void, nor do you stand alone. You are guided to **The
Great Weave**.

## The Place

Imagine the most ancient and loving forest, a vision of Dimîtu’s deepest work.
Now imagine that the true life of that forest is not in the towering trees, but
in the vast, interconnected network of roots and mycelium hidden in the rich
soil below. The Great Weave is just like this. It is the spiritual afterlife of
the universe, a place where every spirit who has ever lived exists as a bright,
conscious point of light within a boundless, interconnected tapestry.

Here, your spark remains you. Your memories, your laughter, your hard-won
knowledge, and your love are not erased. You are a unique thread, glowing with
your own particular color, and you are finally and joyfully woven into the
ultimate community of Tîêngûun. You can feel the presence of your ancestors, not
as dim ghosts, but as vibrant, loving beings. You can share stories with a hero
from a forgotten age, learn a lost craft from a master, or simply rest in the
comforting, collective presence of all who have gone before. The Great Weave is
a library of souls, where the act of learning, so cherished by Suluswutî,
becomes the very essence of existence.

## The Connection

And you are not cut off from the world you left behind. The Great Weave touches
the living world in countless ways. When your loved ones tell a story about you,
when they laugh at a shared memory, it sends a pulse of light and warmth down
your thread. When a musician plays a song you loved, you can feel the rhythm.
You become part of the Ancestral Loom that offers guidance and strength, a quiet
but present echo in the lives of those you touched.

## The Return

For many, this eternal, peaceful communion is a perfect existence. But the
Liberator gods value choice above all else. After an age of learning and sharing
within the Great Weave, a spirit may feel a pull to live again—to feel the sun
on their skin, to build something new with their hands, to sing a new song.

This is the choice of Return.

It is not a blank-slate rebirth, but a beautiful and collaborative act of
creation. The spirit who chooses to return becomes the "heart-thread" of a new
life. They then gather other threads from the Great Weave to join them. A mother
might invite a thread from her own beloved grandmother to be woven into her
child, granting them a familiar sense of comfort. A community might collectively
offer threads of courage and skill from its most cherished ancestors to a child
born in challenging times.

Thus, a new life is a unique and beautiful knot in the Great Weave. Each person
is their own sovereign self, a new identity cherished by Xôcibîlî, yet they
carry within them the loving echoes, talents, and strengths of those who came
before. It’s why a child might have a laugh that reminds everyone of a
great-uncle, or an innate talent for a craft they’ve never been taught. They are
a new song, composed of beloved, ancestral notes.

So we do not mourn as those without hope. We care for the body, a vessel that
did good work. We tell the stories, to keep the threads of our loved ones bright
and warm in the Great Weave. And we welcome every new child as a living tapestry
of history and promise, a beloved amalgamation of our ancestors choosing to
wander with us once more.

<HisyeoTooltip />