---
sidebar_position: 5
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';
import HisyeoTabs from '@site/src/components/HisyeoTabs'
import HisyeoText from '@site/src/components/HisyeoText'
import HisyeoWord from '@site/src/components/HisyeoWord'
import HisyeoTooltip from '@site/src/components/HisyeoTooltip'

# Metaphysics

What polytheistic religion would be complete without a satisfying metaphysics?
Hîsyêô's metaphysics is a response to the Neoplatonism of Plotinus and
Iamblichus. It also attempts to incorporate some contemporary ideas of
philosophy and science.

## Dimensions

:::tip Thought Experiment

When one perceives of a line, one is thinking in a single *dimension* of space.
When one perceives of a square, one is thinking in two *dimensions* of space.
When one percieves of a cube, one is thinking in three *dimensions* of space.
You might be getting tired of this exercise but is there a fourth object that is
thought of as being in four dimensions? One might say that this dimension is
*time*. Another way to phrase it is that the fourth dimension is the *motion* of
the object. Now forget about the object that is measured and focus on the
concept of the **dimension**.

Each dimension relates the same material *concept*, length; the same material
*intensity*, the total inches or meters; but each one is oriented towards the
object with a different *perspective*. The *concept* and *intensity* are the
tool and they are applied to objects with different *approaches*. That is the
essense of a dimension. The usage of this tool produces a result that can then
be projected by the observer onto a mental or digital model that matches the
original object in the measured dimensions. Interestingly, the intensity
component is critical to the digital reproduction but less-so to the mental
reproduction.

:::

The tool of dimensions is essential to the understanding of the metaphysics of
Hîsyêô. Just like we measure our material world in four *dimensions*, so too are
there different approaches to measuring that which is beyond the material world
(of course, do not think of "beyond" in a physical sense). Unlike the **four**
physical dimensions, the metaphysical has only **two** dimensions.

### Unity

The unity dimension is the technique that all things are *whole* entities and
"units" which are singular and unified. Each entity is regarded as *one* entity.
This concept can be applied to individual things, groups of things, or the
totality of things. Whatever you are measuring or observing is continous and
infinite.

### Multiplicity

The multiplicity dimension is the technique that all things are *parts* or
elements and the "units" in this case are *within*. Everything is either within
a collection (a variable quantity), a set (a quality-selected quantity), or a
body (a purposeful quantity). The act of relating one object to another can be
implemented by indicating that they are part of a set. This concept can be
applied to individual things (as in the case of negation), groups of things, or
the totality of things. Whatever you are measuring or observing is discrete and
finite.

:::tip Though Experiment

Are the concepts of unity and multiplicity innate to the entity? Perhaps not. As
a thought experiment, think of a yellow flower. Is the flower innately yellow?
No, we know that it absorbs all other colors but yellow which is reflected.

These dimensions are useful tools for inspection, to grasp at the true but
*indescribable* nature of a thing, but the thing itself exists regardless of
whether or not it is a whole, collection, set, or body. 

:::

## Planes

Both dimensions have a part to play in understanding the interplay of the top
 three immaterial *planes* (The Neoplatonists referred to them as "hypostases"
but I think "plane" is a more contemporary English word for this concept). These
planes are each a coextension of the others and are all collocated in time and
space. Think of them like the alternate dimensions of folk, science fiction and
fantasy stories (like the Upside Down of the Stranger Things).

### The Everything

This plane is an entity which is the *entire* universe and also whatever else
exists *beyond* our universe; it is *everything*. The Neoplatonists referred to
this as [The One](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monad_(philosophy)) and it was a
supreme all-encompassing non-being being of pure goodness. The main difference
between the Hîsyêô metaphysics and the Neoplatonists' is that instead of
goodness, the stuff that is the essence of this non-being being is not
"goodness" but perhaps is better described as *neutralness*. Concepts like
*goodness*, *beauty*, and even *neutralness* are just concepts like any other
within The Everything and there is no hierarchy within it. This (non-being)
being's essence has no other word than "everything" which can describe it.

There are various theories at the crossroads of quantum physics and neurology
which posit that concsciousness is an [emergent phenomonon of quantum
activity](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7597170/#sec2-entropy-22-00921).
We can use the dimension of Unity to recognize that The Everything is itself an
entity and the dimension of Multiplicity to recognize that this entity is made
up of innumerable quantum-entangled parts and these entities themselves interact
via quantum activity. Through these observations by even our human minds, we can
recognize that this would be enough quantum activity to be an emergent
concsciousness and we call that consciousness The Divine Mind. The Divine Mind
is effectively self-realized through the all-encompassing nature of The
Everything.

### The Divine Mind

Historically called the [Nous](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nous) or the
Intellect, the Divine Mind is an intelligizing force that has emerged from the
plane of The Everything into its own plane. Now this mind cannot simply sit idly
without engaging in mental activity. Eventually it will recognize it's own
self-awareness. Therefore the mind is or becomes active and aware of itself or
rather of The Everything. To observe The Everything that exists outside of being
and non-being is to engage in infinite and sometimes paradoxical observations
and through experiencing all this, the Divine Mind is or becomes all-knowing and
all-powerful and has, through its knowledge and power contains or built a
perfect copy of the Everything inside of its mind (think of it like a digital
lossless copy). This mental model of The Everything, through both unity and
multiplicity measurements, has created something truly complex and
interconnected inside of the Divine Mind which is the ideas or *forms* of
everything that exists within The Everything. Harkening back to the emergent
consciousnesses theory, we again use our tools of dimensions to see that there
is a sufficiently large network of quantum activity in this divine "image" of
The Everything. What emerges into a new plane is a consciousness that we call
the Cosmic Soul.

### The Cosmic Soul

Sometimes called the [Psyche](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anima_mundi), this
concsciousness emerges from the plane of Divine Mind. As before, the Cosmic Soul
is a mind and whether immediately or after some time, it eventually becomes
self-aware and begins observing but this time we are now in a new plane and the
plane we're observing is now the Divine Mind. Through its infinite observations
with the dimensions of Unity and Multiplicity of the Divine Mind's forms, it has
built a complex mental model of the *qualities* and *relationships* of the forms
. It posits how they would all causally interact if they existed in a material
world. This act of intelligizing produces a dream which is a perfect imagining
of what a material world would be utilizing the forms of the Divine Mind. This
dream is the material plane.

After [The Great Shattering](shattering.mdx), the Cosmic Soul is the remaining
pieces that represent the qualities and relationships of the material realm (the
scienitific standard model). The pieces that have shattered are twofold:

1. the Individual Souls of all sentient beings, and
2. the Shards of control, manipulation, oppression and all the ways that the The
   First Law (the original Cosmic Soul) used to keep The Material Plane in a unified
   and non-chaotic state.

### The Material

The Material plane is our world around us today. It is a *dream* inside of the
Cosmic Soul. Despite being a universe-encompassing bundle of quantum
entanglements, we do not posit a consciousness beyond the material plane which
observes the material plane (like we do for the other planes). This could be due
to the Cosmic Soul intentionally generating (intelligizing) the dream plane and
thus this plane is more of a pseudo-plane. Another theory is that this plane's
quantum activity is or generates The Everything in a rather circular fashion.
Neoplatonists historically argued that this plane is removed from the others
because it is a shadow of the perfect forms. Therefore it doesn't "emanate" or,
to take this idea into Hîsyêô metaphysics, it doesn't have true quantum
entanglements and therefore consciousness cannot emerge. However, this
explanation is tenuous because it seems to imply that the Cosmic Soul's mind is
less capable than the Divine Mind's. Perhaps each plane removed from the The
Everything is some magnitude less powerful.

## Individual Souls

As was mentioned earlier, since the Cosmic Soul's qualities and relationships
make up the thoughts that cause the dream of the material plane, you might be
wondering where our individual souls fit into this metaphysics. As it turns out,
each individual soul is just a slice (like a pizza slice) of the larger Cosmic
Soul. Prior to the [great shattering](shattering.mdx), we were not individual
souls at all. We didn't exist as souls but as
[zombies](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Philosophical_zombie). Now our souls
have *shattered* (what the Neoplatonists referred to as
[*descending*](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/iamblichus/#SoulPlacSyst) only
without the same pomp and circumstance) and are now truly *within* us in the
Material Plane. If we align our mind and our body towards the Divine Mind we can
lift our piece of the Cosmic Soul back into place restoring unity but, thanks to
the great gift of the gods (aspects of the Divine Mind), also imbuing a newfound
multiplicity of an Individual Soul as an independent unit amongst the Cosmic
Soul.

:::tip Thought Experiment

Imagine that you are sleeping and experiencing a dream. Most of us lack the
ability to grasp that we are in a dream. Instead we are oblivious, going through
real experiences and real emotions and reactions until finally we are slammed
back into reality. Only the most advanced oneironauts have mastered the art of
recognizing they are in a dream. The reason that these dreams can be broken at
all (although challenging) is because they are dreams generated by individual
souls. These kinds of dreams lack the power of the dream generated by the Cosmic
Soul.

:::

To recognize that the material plane is a dream, takes a lifetime of
dedication to inward and outward work. Inwardly, you must arrange your mind,
your thoughts and your principles such that you are able to better recognize the
dream and eventually begin to grasp the planes beyond. Outwardly, you can engage
in ritual acts in the material world that influence us behaviorally and give us
tools for metaphorical mental activity. You can also engage in virtous acts
towards others as acts of kindness and care change us in often profound ways and
lift our souls up towards the Cosmos.

## Gods

The gods themselves are similar to the individual souls explained previously:
they are slices or *aspects* of the Divine Mind. [Gods](..\category\gods)
represent specific domains of ideas or forms and they are essentially
*personifications* of parts of the Divine Mind (applying the dimension of
multiplicity). This allows you to have a a metaphysical point (an anchor) that
you can turn your mind towards. The ritual acts help us to further adjust our
alignment keeping us focused on the Divine Mind as much as possible.

## Ethics

How do we derive an ethics from this metaphysics? The Everything is itself
*neutral* and **not** all good like that of the Neoplatonists so there's no
reason to necessarily do *good* acts because why would doing good acts turn you
towards a neutral god?

First, let's remember that The Everything is not goodness and beauty that exists
outside of space and time. It is **not** God but rather the entirety of
everything. So why would we turn towards everything and is that just absurdity?
Perhaps!

Instead of turning towards The Everything, we turn towards the Divine Mind as it
is the greatest mind. Given that our soul is a third-order mind (Divine Mind ->
Cosmic Soul -> Individual Soul), to better improve ourselves, we should seek to
access the broader Cosmic Soul that we are part of (even though we are currently
separated from it). Just like an employee should seek to understand their
organization so that they can act in the best interest of the organization, so
too should you seek to understand the Cosmic Soul so that you can act in the
best interest of it. To understand the Cosmic Soul is to see the world through
everyone's perspective and to understand the qualities and relationships that
direct the rest of matter.

:::warning Evil

Since The Everything is *not* goodness, where does that leave the Neoplatonic
argument for the lack of an existence of evil? This debate is rather archaic
given that the concept of [moral
relativism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moral_relativism) is well-reasoned and
also scientifically accepted. Since The Everything is neutral, there is *no*
existence of Good nor Evil. Instead, they are shards of [The First
Law](docs\religion\first-law.mdx) which can be used to reduce the agency of
others. Yes, even "Goodness" can be a lever of power.

Semantics aside, the Hîsyêô metaphysical approach to the question of "Is there
good and evil?" is to say that each individual soul has a *will to power* and
real "goodness" should be a measure of how much a soul expresses itself to the
fullest and also equally ensures that other souls have unbridled access to their
will to power so that all can return to the unity of the Cosmic Soul and accept
the gift of multiplicity of the individual soul. To simplify, it is mutual aid
and synergy.

:::

## Why Have A Metaphysics?

In a roundabout way, this metaphysics was created because of [Nietzsche's
Philosophy of
Religion](https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/nietzsches-philosophy-of-religion/E439DF633826708AD3F11B4B07C36706)
by Julian Young. Young makes the case that Nietzche wanted a revival of the
Ancient Greek religion because he felt that the Christian transformation of
European culture was a recipe for disaster. Nietzsche's third metamorphosis, of
the Child, is that of a first mover of a new culture and a new paradigm. Young
implies that Nietzsche wanted a first mover to re-engineer the Greek pantheon
for a new era. That planted the seed that led to the creation of a pantheon that
would, on the one hand hopefully fulfill Nietzsche's dream; and on the other
hand, would facilitate a new social order based on science, self-expression, and
with no masters.

If one chooses to read various primary and secondary sources on the Greek
pantheon, it is inevitable that one would reach Plotinus and the rest of the
Neoplatonists. To make a complete religion that covers all religious expression,
it became a necessity that there be a metaphysics that complements the
mythology. A good metaphysics is the glue that binds rituals and principles of a
religion to the cultural practices of a community.


<HisyeoTooltip />