---
sidebar_position: 6
---

# Enders

A type of word that ends a clause or a sentence.

## Clause Enders

Currently the only true clause ender is the comma and it's treated as slight
pause in spoken language. 

:::tip Unlike Kokanu

This is different from Kokanu because many of the words in Hîsyêô that do not
exist in Kokanu, were chosen so that they *reduce* the need for inner clauses.
The spoken comma particle was added to Kokanu to help reduce the comprehension
challenges of having many inner clauses in a sentence. Since Hîsyêô has 2.5
times the amount of words as Kokanu, there's less need for inner clauses and so
the added non-naturalistic spoken comma has far less utility.

:::

If you feel that you need to use a specific sentence ender for a sub-clause
only, then you need to break the sentence up in order to use the sentence ender
for the appropriate segment.

## Sentence Enders

There are many sentence enders in Hîsyêô unlike Kokanu. These allow Hîsyêô
speakers to properly express what could be considered as "registers" in that
they change the overall tone of what is being said. The content remains the
same, but the meaning is changed considerably.

### Emphasis/Confirmation

This particle is used for adding emphasis to a statement. In English, we add
words like "do", "sure", "really" to indicate that the sentence is of greater
importance to the surrounding explanation or to affirm a predicate as true.

<HisyeoTabs>
    <p>nîo tûu sî yoûtî foût lôîcôk.&emsp;<em>"Indeed, he made several mistakes"</em></p>
    <p>noyo li xoînbo in dêko êto misli nîmû lôîcôk.&emsp;<em>"I do look very similar to you"</em></p>
    <p>nîmû kûu li yoûmok lôîcôk.&emsp;<em>"Surely, you must be joking"</em></p>
</HisyeoTabs>

### Surprise/Excitement

This particle is used to indicate that the statement was not the expected
outcome for the speaker or that the speaker is really interested/excited by it.
In English, we end our sentences with independent phrases like "wow!" or "cool"
or we might use an exclamation point to indicate this feeling in certain
sentences that don't have an explicit spoken word.

<HisyeoTabs>
    <p>nîmû li sî gîk foxo.&emsp;<em>"Wow, you made it!"</em></p>
    <p>nîo dôstoc wîlûwo kon kelo foxo.&emsp;<em>"He scored!"</em></p>
    <p>nîo ke li zîgîl foxo.&emsp;<em>"They are going to fall!"</em></p>
</HisyeoTabs>

### Tag Questions

This is the traditional interrogative mood particle. It is like ending a
sentence with "yes?", "no?", or some uses of "right?".

### Agreement/Proposal

When used to end a predicate with a deontically-marked verb, it indicates that
the mood is proposotive (a suggestion or proposal). When used to end an
epistemtically-marked verb, it indicates the mood is hypothetical,
potential/tentative, or eventive. This means that the speaker believes the
statement to be possible and they are staking their belief. When used with an
unmarked verb (realis), it indicates a gnomic/aorist mood meaning that the
statement is considered a general truth or principle to the speaker. In all
cases, it is similar to adding "do you agree?", "agreed?" or "right?" to the end
of an English sentence.

### Friendliness/Politeness

When used to end a predicate with a deontically-marked verb, it indicates that
the mood is benedictive (a blessing). When used to end an epistemically-marked
verb, it indicates a permissive or concessive mood. When used with an unmarked
verb (realis), it simply brings a sense of friendliness or politeness. There's
no difference between speaking with your friends/family and people you respect
in the workplace. In all cases, it is similar to adding "please", "sir",
"madam", "dear" to the end of an English sentence.

### Aggressive/Emotive

This particle adds a note of frustration or anguish to the sentence. This can be
considered a more intense version of the surprise/excitement particle but it's
primarily intended to be a replacement for swear words.



