---
sidebar_position: 5
---

# Connectors

A type of word that connects clauses together within a sentence. If a connector
word is followed by a preposition, it means a new predicate has been initiated
(you can just tack on another preposition without using a connector and the
predicate doesn't begin anew). If you do not provide a preposition but instead
provide a content word (noun, adjective or verb), then the connected phrase is
part of the existing preposition prior to the connector.

:::info Verbs After Connectors

When you supply a verb after a connector, it represents the *noun* form of that
verb. You might be wondering why verbs don't act like other prepositions and
initiate a new predicate. This is because verbs *already* introduce a new
predicate whenever they are free-floating (not preceded by a marker). Plus,
using verbs in their noun forms is extremely useful and shouldn't be restricted
to only the first noun phrase in a chain of noun phrases bound by connector
words.

:::

## Cumulative (and)

When used within a thematic phrase, this connector creates a compound phrase
where two or more sub phrases are combined to be the final result.

When used to connect predicates, this connector means the predicates occurred
simultaneously.

## Alternative (or)

When used within a thematic phrase, this connector creates a compound phrase
that could be multiple possible phrases but only one of the phrases given will
be selected or will happen. This is used for creating options or choices.

When used to connect predicates, the effect is a similar set of options or
possibilities but each predicate is likely intended to be a proposal,
prediction, or estimation.

## Adversative (but/however)

When used within a thematic phrase, this is similar to the cumulative connector
but the additional phrase is in some ways contrastive or unexpected from the
prior phrase.

When used to connect predicates, the effect is similar in that the second
predicate is in contrast to the first.

## Comparative (than/as)

When used within a thematic phrase, the first phrase is being directly compared
to the second. When there is a comparative adjective, the effect is similar to
"than" in English. When there is no comparative adjective, the effect is similar
to wrapping an adjective in "as...as" in English.

There is no semantically valid usage of a comparative connector with predicates.

## Sequential (then/so)

When used within a thematic phrase, each subsequent phrase is an object or theme
of the verb or preposition *in order*.

When used to connect predicates, the second predicate is either a consequence,
direct result, or next step of the first.
